---
title: International User Interfaces
lecturer: Craig
---

# What is cross-cultural design?

Designing technology for different cultures, languages and economic
standings to ensure usability and user experience across cultural
boundaries

We use western design patterns and mostly use English as the mean
language. But to make sure our designs are effective we must know that
everything is interpreted by users based on their cultural backgrounds
and values

# Some issues

Factors that effect an individual’s response to a system

-   Age, gender, race, sexuality, class, religion and political
    persuasion

Exported software frequently required modifications to suit local
customs; laws or conventions

Most experiences have previously concentrated on the technical issues
such as the spelling dictionary and translation

However some applications blend technical and social facilities such as
groupware - this increases the complexity of the design issues

The development of multiple interfaces is costly so it is important to
make generic, and easily modifiable, as much of the interface as
possible

# Three levels of interface specialisation

**Globalisation**

-   A fully globalized app or website is fully available and functional
    in multiple languages

-   Globalisation is the end goal and to achieve this we have to consider
    the other two processes within globalisation

**Internationalisation**

-   Internationalisation is a task that has to be completed in order for
    the end goal to be achieved. Internationalisation is not the easiest
    change to make to a website and it takes a lot more effort than just
    translating the website’s language. It is the process of designing
    and building an application to facilitate localisation

**Localisation**

-   Refers to the adaptation of a product, application or document
    content to meet the language, cultural requirements of a specific
    target market (a locale) developing specific interfaces to meet a
    particular market

# Effective design

Effective design involves recognising the cultural elements in a given
application

Cultural diversity makes it even more unrealistic for designers to rely
on intuition or personal experience for interface design

Adaptation of shared interfaces requires identification of user factors,
including:

-   Objective factors: gender, age, ethnic background, mother-tongue

-   Subjective factors: which cannot be directly measured or identified
    such as cognitive style

# Iceberg model

**Surface**: visible, obvious rules such as number, currency, time and
date formats

**Unspoken rules**: Obscured, need context of situation to understand
the rules

**Unconscious rules**: Rules out of conscious awareness and difficult to
study

# Multi-cultural interface design

Some practical advice on factors that are affected by culture, language
and local conventions

-   Character sets and collating sequences

-   Format conventions for numbers, dates, times and currency

-   Layout conventions e.g. for names, addresses and telephone numbers

-   Icons, symbols, graphics and colours; screen text

<Definition name="Collating Sequences">
These define the value and position of each character with respect to other characters. Alphabetic and alphanumeric lists are sorted according to these sequences. However, different cultures have different sequences and rules for sorting these characters
</Definition>

## Icons, fonts and symbols

Not all icons translate across cultures, in Japan tick means incorrect
and a circle means correct

# Cultural issues

Issues that impact the user interface from locale to locale include:

-   **Nationalism** - What is considered an inherent part of a nation or
    culture and what is considered a threat to it

-   **Language** - People are insulted by "low status" dialect

-   **Social context** - Who made a statement is just as important as
    what the statement is in some parts of the world

# User customisation

-   Keep sentences as short and simple as possible

-   Allow users to select the date and time format

-   Allow users to select calendar format

-   Allow users to select paper size

-   Allow users to select numeric and monetary formats
