---
title: Architectural Style
---

# Call and return

Characterised by:

-   Order of computation (sequencing of control)

-   Only a single thread of control (no concurrency)

-   Structures organised around computational tasks

Type of reasoning:

-   Hierarchical, organised around control being passed from "higher" to
    "lower" items

-   Task performed by a set of sub-tasks

-   Explicit control linkages between the subtasks and the algorithm of
    the program to determine calling order

## Example 1

Main program/sub-programs:

-   Components are subprograms

-   Connectors are the invocation links (including parameters)

This is the form that is embodied in most non-OO imperative programming
languages

![image](/img/Year_2/Software_Engineering/Software_Design/Style/Call_and_Return.webp)

## Example 2

Classical objects - here the methods are part of the objects:

-   Components are both the objects and also their methods/data

-   Connectors are the method calls and parameters

Supported by object-based and object-oriented programming languages. May
use run-time bindings

![image](/img/Year_2/Software_Engineering/Software_Design/Style/Call_and_Return1.webp)

# Interacting Processes

Characterised by:

-   Communication patterns among independent, usually concurrent,
    processes

-   Independent elements can be objects, lightweight processes, services
    etc

-   Context is more complex as emphasis is upon "interaction"

Type of reasoning

-   Non-deterministic - scheduling of system elements is performed by
    separate, independent computers

-   Design based around these independent actions and needs to
    specifically address any requirements that impose the need for
    particular sequences or interactions

## Communicating processes

Based around a network of processes running on different machines and
linked via Remote Procedure Calls (RPC)

-   Components are the processes

-   Connectors are the message protocols via RPCs

Binding time can be at each construction or when the system is started.
Each system runs in its own address space - no direct access to shared
data

![image](/img/Year_2/Software_Engineering/Software_Design/Style/Communicating_Processes.webp)

## Lightweight processes (threads)

A thread is a block of code that can be executed independently of other
threads within the program

-   Components are the threads

-   Connectors are provided largely by using shared data

Because threads are part of a single process, they have a shared data
space, needing care with synchronisation of access

![image](/img/Year_2/Software_Engineering/Software_Design/Style/Threads.webp)

# Data-Centred Repository

Characterised by:

-   A dominant central data store that is manipulated by independent
    communications

-   Centred around the issues relating to data access

-   Data is at the focus

Type of reasoning:

-   Can depend on the form of the system

-   For databases it is the ACID properties

-   Includes modern compilers

## Transactional Database

The classical idea of the data-centred repository

-   Components - Memory and computations within the database

-   Connectors - Transaction streams (queries)

Style is not concerned with the internal form of the database, only with
its role

![image](/img/Year_2/Software_Engineering/Software_Design/Style/Transactional_Database.webp)

## Client-Server

A "distributed" form using a "thin" client process to interact with the
end-users. While the server often incorporates a database, this is not a
necessity

-   Components - Data managers and computations

-   Connectors - Transaction operations with history

The history element is important, systems that lack this are sometimes
termed "naive client-server" forms

# Data-Sharing

Characterised by:

-   Direct sharing of data between the components

-   Data may be distributed between many elements, but these share a
    common form of "representation" for using and sharing this data

Type of reasoning:

-   Based upon the data representation itself and ensuring that this is
    common to all elements

-   Describes both programs, but also documents

## Hypertext

This is a "document" form rather than a program form, but still an
important architectural style since it affects the way that programs are
structured in order to use it

-   Components - Documents in HTML format

-   Connectors - Hyperlinks and internal anchors

Websites can incorporate both static pages and also pages that are
generated dynamically, so this example is quite an important one.

# Mixed styles

An example of a mixed style is a compiler, it started out as pipe and
filter, but are now usually more of a data-centred repository.

# Shaw and Clementâ€™s classification

-   Context is elaborated by being sub-divided into three aspects
    (control, data and control/data interaction) which are further
    sub-divided

-   In addition, they consider the form of reasoning that might be used
    with a particular architectural style

Control issues are classified in terms of:

-   Topology (geometric form)

-   Synchronicity (interdependence of actions and states)

-   Binding time (when is the identify of a partner established)

Data issues are classified using:

-   Topology - same concept as for control

-   Continuity - e.g. continuous flow of data or sporadic flow

-   Mode - whether data is copied, shared etc

-   Binding time (as for control)

Control/data interaction captures some further relationships, and is
classified in terms of

-   Share (are control and data flow topologies isomorphic?)

-   Directionality (if the shapes are the same, does control flow in the
    same direction as data, or in the opposite direction)

# Architectural Mismatch

<Definition name="Architectural Mismatch">
Mismatched assumptions a reusable part makes about the system it is to be a part of
</Definition>

Basic cause was in the detail (of components, connectors and context).
Each element had a slightly different model of how control and event
passing was organised, reinforcing the point that all of the different
aspects of architectural style are relevant

# Security

-   The way this is handled will depend on architectural style

-   Each style will exhibit its own vulnerabilities

    -   How does a component check or confirm that is it connected to a
        valid component

    -   How might it be attacked

    -   How easily can we achieve "information hiding" within a
        particular architectural style

-   Increasingly, this adds a new dimension to those that the designer
    has to think of

# Choosing a style

Some guidelines on choice of style, where this is not already determined
by other factors:

-   For strongly sequential tasks: batch sequential or pipe-and-filter

-   For tasks which involve transformation on continuous streams of
    data, use pipe-and-filter

-   If a central issue in your system is understanding the data used in
    the application, consider a repository style

-   For flexibility, loose coupling between tasks and reactive tasks,
    consider interacting processes
